Box Office Gambler: A Monte Carlo Greenlight Simulator
CS 458 — Final Project Writeup
Freeman Irabaruta


How to Run
----------

The project is a Streamlit web app. On the Zoo:

    pip install streamlit numpy plotly
    streamlit run app.py

It opens a browser tab. If you're SSH'd in, forward port 8501:

    ssh -L 8501:localhost:8501 netid@zoo.cs.yale.edu

Then open http://localhost:8501 in your browser.

A hosted version is also running at:
https://web-production-9e254.up.railway.app/


What It Does
------------

Box Office Gambler is a tool that answers one question: should a studio
greenlight a movie? The user fills in six parameters about a hypothetical
film — production budget, genre, release month, lead actor star power,
franchise status, and MPAA rating — and the system runs a Monte Carlo
simulation (10,000 trials by default, configurable up to 100,000) to
produce a probability distribution over the film's financial outcomes.

The output is a greenlight decision — one of GREEN LIGHT, PROCEED WITH
CAUTION, or PASS — along with probability estimates for profitability,
blockbuster status, and flop risk. The interface shows histograms of
simulated worldwide gross, opening weekend, and ROI, plus a percentile
table breaking down the range of outcomes from pessimistic (P5) to
optimistic (P95).


The Simulation Model
--------------------

Each trial samples from several independent distributions that represent
the uncertain factors driving box office revenue:

1. Base opening weekend. Drawn as a fraction of production budget
   (Normal, mean=0.20, sd=0.05, clipped to [0.08, 0.50]). This reflects
   the rough empirical relationship between what a movie costs and what it
   opens to — a $100M film typically opens around $20M, give or take.

2. Seasonal adjustment. The release month applies a multiplicative factor
   to the opening weekend. July carries a 1.35x multiplier; September
   gets 0.60x. These numbers come from aggregating opening weekends by
   month across wide releases from 2010-2024.

3. Star power. An additive boost to the opening weekend, in millions.
   A-List adds ~$20M on average; an unknown cast adds nothing. This is
   additive rather than multiplicative because star power tends to put a
   floor under opening weekend regardless of budget — a $10M indie with
   a major star still opens bigger than one without.

4. Franchise multiplier. Sequels and established franchises carry a
   multiplicative boost (1.3x and 1.6x respectively). Original IP gets
   1.0x. These stack with the other factors.

5. Rating ceiling. PG-13 gets a 1.10x multiplier on the opening (widest
   possible audience), while R gets 0.80x (restricted audience).

6. Legs. Once the opening weekend is determined, the simulation converts
   it to a domestic total using a genre-specific "opening share" ratio.
   Horror films are front-loaded (52% of domestic gross in the opening
   weekend), while dramas have long legs (only 25% opening share). This
   ratio is itself sampled from a normal distribution per trial, so some
   simulated runs get lucky with strong word-of-mouth and some don't.

7. International multiplier. Domestic total is multiplied by a genre-
   specific international ratio to get worldwide gross. Action films
   average 1.6x their domestic gross internationally; comedies only 0.7x,
   because humor doesn't travel as well.

8. Studio revenue. The model assumes studios take home roughly 50% of
   worldwide theatrical gross. This is a simplification — the real split
   varies by market, by deal, and over a film's run — but it's the
   standard rule of thumb used in industry back-of-envelope calculations.
   Profitability is assessed against this 50% figure.

All distributions are clipped to physically plausible ranges to avoid
nonsense outcomes (negative grosses, opening weekends larger than total
domestic, etc.).


What Makes This Interesting
---------------------------

The whole point of Monte Carlo here is that it captures something a
point estimate can't: the shape of the risk. Two movies might have the
same expected worldwide gross, but completely different risk profiles.
A horror film on a $5M budget has a narrow distribution skewed toward
profit — it almost can't lose money, but it also probably won't crack
$300M. A $250M sci-fi tentpole has a fat distribution stretching from
catastrophic loss to billion-dollar hit. The expected value might favor
the tentpole, but the probability of ruin is much higher. A histogram
shows this instantly in a way a single number never could.

The other thing I find genuinely useful about the model is what it
reveals about genre asymmetries. I knew horror was "efficient" before
building this, but running the simulation made the magnitude concrete:
a $15M horror film with no stars, released in October, has something
like an 85% chance of profitability. The same budget in the romance
genre, same month, drops to around 50%. The priors do most of the work
here — horror's high multiplier and low budget threshold combine to
create an almost unfair advantage. Studios clearly know this already
(Blumhouse's entire business model), but seeing it fall out of a
simulation rather than being told it as a fact feels different.


How It Explains Decisions
-------------------------

This was the main design constraint for the project, and I tried to
address it at three levels:

Factor attribution. After each simulation, the system generates a
plain-English explanation for each input factor, tagged as positive,
negative, or neutral. For example: "May is a peak season (+25% opening
boost)" or "R rating limits audience ceiling (-20%)". The thresholds for
these labels are hardcoded against the empirical priors — a month factor
above 1.1 is "positive," below 0.8 is "negative," and anything between
is "neutral." This isn't a post-hoc interpretability method bolted onto
a black box; the model is transparent by construction, so the
explanations are direct readouts of the actual parameters driving the
simulation. There's no gap between what the model does and what the
explanation says it does.

Probability distributions. The histograms themselves are a form of
explanation. Rather than saying "this movie will gross $320M," the system
says "here is the full distribution of 10,000 simulated outcomes, here's
where break-even sits relative to the mass of that distribution, and
here's the median." The user can visually assess the skew, the variance,
and the tail risk. The percentile table makes this precise: you can read
off "there's a 5% chance this movie grosses below $X" directly.

Counterfactual analysis. The bottom of the results page re-runs the
simulation across every genre and every release month (holding the other
parameters fixed) and displays bar charts comparing the median worldwide
gross for each alternative. This answers the "what if" question — if the
user picked Action but the counterfactual chart shows Adventure would
have a higher median, they can see that immediately. The user's actual
choice is highlighted in a different color. This is probably the most
useful section for someone actually trying to make scheduling decisions,
because it turns the tool from a single-point evaluator into a
comparison engine.

None of these explanation methods require a secondary model, a surrogate,
or a post-hoc approximation. The simulation is the model, and the
explanation is a direct decomposition of what the simulation did. That
felt like the cleanest approach for a Monte Carlo system — the technique
is inherently interpretable if you surface the right outputs.


Limitations
-----------

The priors are hand-coded from aggregate industry data, not fit from a
structured dataset with a proper training pipeline. A better version of
this project would scrape Box Office Mojo or use the TMDB API to build
actual empirical distributions from thousands of individual films, and
update them as new data comes in. The current approach is more like a
well-informed back-of-envelope model than a data-driven one.

The independence assumption between factors is also a simplification.
In reality, star power and franchise status are correlated (established
franchises tend to attract bigger stars), and genre interacts with rating
in ways the model doesn't capture (an R-rated horror film faces a
different audience dynamic than an R-rated drama). Modeling these
dependencies would require copulas or a joint distribution, which felt
like scope creep for this project but would be the obvious next step.

The 50% studio revenue share is a rough average. In practice, domestic
splits start around 60% for the studio in the first week and decline,
while international splits vary by country. China in particular has a
much lower studio share (~25%). A more granular model would apply
different revenue shares by market and by week.


Code Structure
--------------

Three files:

- data.py: All empirical priors (genre multipliers, seasonal factors,
  star power tiers, franchise boosts, international ratios). Changing
  the assumptions means editing dictionaries in this file.

- engine.py: The Monte Carlo engine. Takes a MovieInput dataclass,
  runs N trials, returns a SimulationResult with all the arrays and
  computed probabilities. Also contains the factor attribution logic
  and the greenlight decision function.

- app.py: Streamlit frontend. Sidebar for inputs, main area for the
  decision banner, metric cards, Plotly histograms, percentile table,
  factor attribution list, and counterfactual bar charts.

Dependencies: streamlit, numpy, plotly. Nothing else.
